HID.md, before:

# HID Standard

Hasyx Identifier (HID) Standard

## Overview

The Hasyx Identifier (HID) is a standardized string format used within the Hasyx ecosystem to uniquely identify resources, typically database records. It provides a structured way to reference entities across different parts of an application, including projects, namespaces, schemas, tables, and individual record IDs.

## Format

An HID is a slash-separated (`/`) string with the following possible structures:

1.  **Short Form (Schema, Table, ID):**
    `schema/table/id`
    *Example:* `public/users/123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426614174000`

2.  **Project Context (Project, Schema, Table, ID):**
    `project/schema/table/id`
    *Example:* `my-app/public/posts/abcdef012345`

3.  **Full Form (Namespace, Project, Schema, Table, ID):**
    `namespace/project/schema/table/id`
    *Example:* `company-x/my-app/public/invoices/inv_789xyz`

### Components:

*   **`namespace`**: (Optional) A top-level organizational unit. Often represents a company, organization, or a major product line. Defaults to `hasyx` or the value of the `NEXT_PUBLIC_HID_NAMESPACE` environment variable if set.
*   **`project`**: (Optional) Identifies a specific project or application within a namespace. Defaults to the current project's name (derived from `package.json` usually).
*   **`schema`**: (Required) The database schema name (e.g., `public`, `payments`, `custom_schema`).
*   **`table`**: (Required) The database table name (e.g., `users`, `products`).
*   **`id`**: (Required) The unique identifier of the record within the table (e.g., a UUID, an integer ID, a string ID like `prod_abc123`).

### Segment Rules:

*   Each segment (namespace, project, schema, table, id) must be a non-empty string.
*   Segments must not contain the slash character (`/`) itself.
*   Segments should not have leading or trailing whitespace (they are effectively trimmed).

## `lib/hid.ts` Utility

Hasyx provides a utility module `lib/hid.ts` for working with HIDs. It exports a factory function `Hid()` that returns an instance Methoden zum Parsen und Generieren von HIDs.

### Initialization

```typescript
import { Hid } from 'hasyx/lib/hid'; // Or your project's alias

// Initialize with current project name and optional default namespace
// const pckgName = require('../package.json').name; // Or get project name appropriately
const hidInstance = Hid('my-current-project', 'my-organization');

// If defaultNamespace is omitted, it uses process.env.NEXT_PUBLIC_HID_NAMESPACE or 'hasyx' as fallback.
const anotherHidInstance = Hid('another-project'); 
```

**`Hid(projectName: string, defaultNamespace?: string): HidInstance`**

*   `projectName`: The name of the current project. Used as the default project when generating full HIDs if no project is explicitly provided.
*   `defaultNamespace` (Optional): The default namespace for this instance. If not provided, it falls back to `process.env.NEXT_PUBLIC_HID_NAMESPACE`, and then to `'hasyx'`.

### `HidInstance` Methods

An `HidInstance` object contains the following methods:

#### 1. `fromHid(hidString: string, full?: boolean): HidParts | FullHidParts | null`

Parses an HID string into its constituent parts.

*   **Overloads:**
    *   `fromHid(hid: string, full: true): FullHidParts | null;`
    *   `fromHid(hid: string, full?: false): HidParts | null;`
    *   `fromHid(hid: string): HidParts | null;` (defaults to `full = false` logic)
*   **Parameters:**
    *   `hidString`: The HID string to parse.
    *   `full` (Optional `boolean`): 
        *   If `true`, expects a 5-part HID (`namespace/project/schema/table/id`) and returns `FullHidParts`.
        *   If `false` or omitted, it attempts to parse 3, 4, or 5-part HIDs and returns `HidParts` (which might include namespace and project if they were present).
*   **Returns:** An object containing the parsed parts (`HidParts` or `FullHidParts`) or `null` if the string is not a valid HID or doesn't match the expected structure based on the `full` flag.

    ```typescript
    interface HidParts {
      namespace?: string;
      project?: string;
      schema: string;
      table: string;
      id: string;
    }

    interface FullHidParts extends HidParts {
      namespace: string; // Guaranteed to be present
      project: string;   // Guaranteed to be present
    }
    ```

*   **Example:**
    ```typescript
    const parts1 = hidInstance.fromHid('my-org/my-proj/public/users/123', true);
    // { namespace: 'my-org', project: 'my-proj', schema: 'public', table: 'users', id: '123' }

    const parts2 = hidInstance.fromHid('public/posts/abc');
    // { schema: 'public', table: 'posts', id: 'abc' }

    const parts3 = hidInstance.fromHid('other-proj/data/items/xyz');
    // { project: 'other-proj', schema: 'data', table: 'items', id: 'xyz' }
    ```

#### 2. `toHid(...args): string`

Generates an HID string from its components.

*   **Overloads:**
    *   `toHid(options: ToHidOptions, full?: boolean): string;`
    *   `toHid(schema: string, table: string, id: string, full?: boolean): string;`
    *   `toHid(project: string, schema: string, table: string, id: string, full?: boolean): string;`
    *   `toHid(namespace: string, project: string, schema: string, table: string, id: string, full?: boolean): string;`
*   **Parameters:**
    *   Can be an `options` object: `ToHidOptions { schema, table, id, project?, namespace? }`
    *   Or a sequence of string arguments: `(schema, table, id)`, `(project, schema, table, id)`, or `(namespace, project, schema, table, id)`.
    *   An optional final boolean argument `full` (defaults to `false`).
*   **Behavior:**
    *   If `full` is `true`: Always generates a 5-part HID (`namespace/project/schema/table/id`).
        *   If `namespace` is not provided in the input, `instanceDefaultNamespace` (from `Hid` initialization) is used.
        *   If `project` is not provided in the input, `instanceProject` (from `Hid` initialization) is used.
    *   If `full` is `false` (or omitted): Generates the shortest possible valid HID.
        *   If `inputNamespace` is provided and is different from `instanceDefaultNamespace`, it's included.
        *   If `inputProject` is provided and is different from `instanceProject`, it's included.
        *   If a custom `inputNamespace` (different from `instanceDefaultNamespace`) is included, then the `project` part (either `inputProject` or `instanceProject`) will also be included to maintain structure, even if `inputProject` matches `instanceProject` or was undefined.
        *   If both `inputNamespace` and `inputProject` match their respective instance defaults (or are undefined), they are omitted, resulting in `schema/table/id`.
*   **Returns:** The generated HID string.
*   **Throws:** An error if required parts (schema, table, id) are missing or if any segment is invalid.

*   **Example:**
    ```typescript
    // Assuming hidInstance = Hid('my-project', 'my-namespace');

    hidInstance.toHid('public', 'users', '123'); 
    // => "public/users/123"

    hidInstance.toHid('public', 'users', '123', true); 
    // => "my-namespace/my-project/public/users/123"

    hidInstance.toHid({ schema: 'data', table: 'items', id: 'xyz', project: 'other-project' });
    // => "other-project/data/items/xyz"

    hidInstance.toHid({ schema: 'data', table: 'items', id: 'xyz', project: 'other-project' }, true);
    // => "my-namespace/other-project/data/items/xyz"

    hidInstance.toHid({ schema: 'data', table: 'items', id: 'xyz', namespace: 'another-ns', project: 'my-project' });
    // => "another-ns/my-project/data/items/xyz"

    hidInstance.toHid({ schema: 'data', table: 'items', id: 'xyz', namespace: 'my-namespace', project: 'my-project' });
    // => "data/items/xyz" (defaults omitted)
    ```

## Environment Variable: `NEXT_PUBLIC_HID_NAMESPACE`

If the `defaultNamespace` argument is not provided to the `Hid()` factory function, the system will look for the `NEXT_PUBLIC_HID_NAMESPACE` environment variable. If found, its value will be used as the default namespace. This allows for a project-wide default namespace configuration.
If neither `defaultNamespace` argument nor the environment variable is set, `'hasyx'` will be used as the ultimate fallback default namespace.

## Use Cases

*   Uniquely identifying database records in logs, events, or API responses.
*   Creating stable and predictable identifiers for resources that can be parsed programmatically.
*   Linking resources across different microservices or modules if they share the same HID generation/parsing logic and default namespace/project context.
*   As the `object_hid` in payment transactions or subscriptions to link them to a specific billable item.

## Hasyx View and Automated HID Generation

A recent migration introduces a PostgreSQL view named `public.hasyx`. This view is designed to consolidate identifiers from all relevant tables into a single, queryable source of HIDs.

### Computed Columns for Relationships

To facilitate robust relationships between your original tables and the `public.hasyx` view, the migration adds two computed columns to each of your existing tables (those found in `public/hasura-schema.json` with a primary key, excluding system tables):

1.  **`_hasyx_schema_name` (TEXT)**: This column is generated always as the name of the schema the table belongs to (e.g., `'public'`).
2.  **`_hasyx_table_name` (TEXT)**: This column is generated always as the name of the table itself (e.g., `'users'`).

These columns are added using `ALTER TABLE ... ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS ... GENERATED ALWAYS AS (...) STORED`. This ensures that they are always present and accurate without requiring manual data entry.

**Purpose:**

*   **Relationship Mapping**: These columns are crucial for defining Hasura relationships. When creating a relationship from an original table (e.g., `public.users`) to the `public.hasyx` view, Hasura can map:
    *   `users.id` (primary key) → `hasyx.id`
    *   `users._hasyx_schema_name` → `hasyx.schema`
    *   `users._hasyx_table_name` → `hasyx.table`
*   This allows a precise join to the correct entry in the `public.hasyx` view that represents the specific row from the original table.

**Hasura Tracking and GraphQL Exposure:**

While these computed columns are added to your database tables and Hasura is aware of them (which is necessary for the relationship logic to work), they are not typically exposed directly via GraphQL queries through Hasura's default permissions unless explicitly configured. Their primary role is internal for building the HIDs and enabling the relationships.

### `public.hasyx` View Structure

The `public.hasyx` view has the following structure:

*   `hid` (TEXT): The fully constructed Hasyx Identifier (e.g., `namespace/project/schema/table/id`).
*   `namespace` (TEXT): The namespace, taken from `DEFAULT_NAMESPACE` in `lib/hid.ts`.
*   `project` (TEXT): The project name, derived from `package.json` or the current directory name.
*   `schema` (TEXT): The schema name of the original record.
*   `table` (TEXT): The table name of the original record.
*   `id` (TEXT): The primary key of the original record, cast to text.

### Automated Relationships

The migration also attempts to automatically create the following Hasura relationships:

1.  **From Original Table to `public.hasyx`**: An object relationship named `hasyx` is added to each original table, pointing to the corresponding entry in the `public.hasyx` view.
2.  **From `public.hasyx` to Original Table**: An object relationship named `{schema}_{table}` (e.g., `public_users`) is added to the `public.hasyx` view, pointing back to the specific row in the original table. This allows you to traverse from a generic HID back to the concrete source entity.

This setup provides a unified way to work with HIDs and easily navigate between the generic HID representation and the specific source records.

Commit message:

Update documentation to clarify environment variable configuration via `npx hasyx config`, emphasizing that `.env` files are auto-generated and should not be edited manually. Enhance various sections across multiple files to ensure consistent messaging regarding configuration management.

HID.md, after:

# HID Standard

Hasyx Identifier (HID) Standard

## Overview

The Hasyx Identifier (HID) is a standardized string format used within the Hasyx ecosystem to uniquely identify resources, typically database records. It provides a structured way to reference entities across different parts of an application, including projects, namespaces, schemas, tables, and individual record IDs.

## Format

An HID is a slash-separated (`/`) string with the following possible structures:

1.  **Short Form (Schema, Table, ID):**
    `schema/table/id`
    *Example:* `public/users/123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426614174000`

2.  **Project Context (Project, Schema, Table, ID):**
    `project/schema/table/id`
    *Example:* `my-app/public/posts/abcdef012345`

3.  **Full Form (Namespace, Project, Schema, Table, ID):**
    `namespace/project/schema/table/id`
    *Example:* `company-x/my-app/public/invoices/inv_789xyz`

### Components:

*   **`namespace`**: (Optional) A top-level organizational unit. Often represents a company, organization, or a major product line. Defaults to `hasyx` or the value of the `NEXT_PUBLIC_HID_NAMESPACE` environment variable if set.
*   **`project`**: (Optional) Identifies a specific project or application within a namespace. Defaults to the current project's name (derived from `package.json` usually).
*   **`schema`**: (Required) The database schema name (e.g., `public`, `payments`, `custom_schema`).
*   **`table`**: (Required) The database table name (e.g., `users`, `products`).
*   **`id`**: (Required) The unique identifier of the record within the table (e.g., a UUID, an integer ID, a string ID like `prod_abc123`).

### Segment Rules:

*   Each segment (namespace, project, schema, table, id) must be a non-empty string.
*   Segments must not contain the slash character (`/`) itself.
*   Segments should not have leading or trailing whitespace (they are effectively trimmed).

## `lib/hid.ts` Utility

Hasyx provides a utility module `lib/hid.ts` for working with HIDs. It exports a factory function `Hid()` that returns an instance Methoden zum Parsen und Generieren von HIDs.

### Initialization

```typescript
import { Hid } from 'hasyx/lib/hid'; // Or your project's alias

// Initialize with current project name and optional default namespace
// const pckgName = require('../package.json').name; // Or get project name appropriately
const hidInstance = Hid('my-current-project', 'my-organization');

// If defaultNamespace is omitted, it uses process.env.NEXT_PUBLIC_HID_NAMESPACE or 'hasyx' as fallback.
const anotherHidInstance = Hid('another-project'); 
```

**`Hid(projectName: string, defaultNamespace?: string): HidInstance`**

*   `projectName`: The name of the current project. Used as the default project when generating full HIDs if no project is explicitly provided.
*   `defaultNamespace` (Optional): The default namespace for this instance. If not provided, it falls back to `process.env.NEXT_PUBLIC_HID_NAMESPACE`, and then to `'hasyx'`.

### `HidInstance` Methods

An `HidInstance` object contains the following methods:

#### 1. `fromHid(hidString: string, full?: boolean): HidParts | FullHidParts | null`

Parses an HID string into its constituent parts.

*   **Overloads:**
    *   `fromHid(hid: string, full: true): FullHidParts | null;`
    *   `fromHid(hid: string, full?: false): HidParts | null;`
    *   `fromHid(hid: string): HidParts | null;` (defaults to `full = false` logic)
*   **Parameters:**
    *   `hidString`: The HID string to parse.
    *   `full` (Optional `boolean`): 
        *   If `true`, expects a 5-part HID (`namespace/project/schema/table/id`) and returns `FullHidParts`.
        *   If `false` or omitted, it attempts to parse 3, 4, or 5-part HIDs and returns `HidParts` (which might include namespace and project if they were present).
*   **Returns:** An object containing the parsed parts (`HidParts` or `FullHidParts`) or `null` if the string is not a valid HID or doesn't match the expected structure based on the `full` flag.

    ```typescript
    interface HidParts {
      namespace?: string;
      project?: string;
      schema: string;
      table: string;
      id: string;
    }

    interface FullHidParts extends HidParts {
      namespace: string; // Guaranteed to be present
      project: string;   // Guaranteed to be present
    }
    ```

*   **Example:**
    ```typescript
    const parts1 = hidInstance.fromHid('my-org/my-proj/public/users/123', true);
    // { namespace: 'my-org', project: 'my-proj', schema: 'public', table: 'users', id: '123' }

    const parts2 = hidInstance.fromHid('public/posts/abc');
    // { schema: 'public', table: 'posts', id: 'abc' }

    const parts3 = hidInstance.fromHid('other-proj/data/items/xyz');
    // { project: 'other-proj', schema: 'data', table: 'items', id: 'xyz' }
    ```

#### 2. `toHid(...args): string`

Generates an HID string from its components.

*   **Overloads:**
    *   `toHid(options: ToHidOptions, full?: boolean): string;`
    *   `toHid(schema: string, table: string, id: string, full?: boolean): string;`
    *   `toHid(project: string, schema: string, table: string, id: string, full?: boolean): string;`
    *   `toHid(namespace: string, project: string, schema: string, table: string, id: string, full?: boolean): string;`
*   **Parameters:**
    *   Can be an `options` object: `ToHidOptions { schema, table, id, project?, namespace? }`
    *   Or a sequence of string arguments: `(schema, table, id)`, `(project, schema, table, id)`, or `(namespace, project, schema, table, id)`.
    *   An optional final boolean argument `full` (defaults to `false`).
*   **Behavior:**
    *   If `full` is `true`: Always generates a 5-part HID (`namespace/project/schema/table/id`).
        *   If `namespace` is not provided in the input, `instanceDefaultNamespace` (from `Hid` initialization) is used.
        *   If `project` is not provided in the input, `instanceProject` (from `Hid` initialization) is used.
    *   If `full` is `false` (or omitted): Generates the shortest possible valid HID.
        *   If `inputNamespace` is provided and is different from `instanceDefaultNamespace`, it's included.
        *   If `inputProject` is provided and is different from `instanceProject`, it's included.
        *   If a custom `inputNamespace` (different from `instanceDefaultNamespace`) is included, then the `project` part (either `inputProject` or `instanceProject`) will also be included to maintain structure, even if `inputProject` matches `instanceProject` or was undefined.
        *   If both `inputNamespace` and `inputProject` match their respective instance defaults (or are undefined), they are omitted, resulting in `schema/table/id`.
*   **Returns:** The generated HID string.
*   **Throws:** An error if required parts (schema, table, id) are missing or if any segment is invalid.

*   **Example:**
    ```typescript
    // Assuming hidInstance = Hid('my-project', 'my-namespace');

    hidInstance.toHid('public', 'users', '123'); 
    // => "public/users/123"

    hidInstance.toHid('public', 'users', '123', true); 
    // => "my-namespace/my-project/public/users/123"

    hidInstance.toHid({ schema: 'data', table: 'items', id: 'xyz', project: 'other-project' });
    // => "other-project/data/items/xyz"

    hidInstance.toHid({ schema: 'data', table: 'items', id: 'xyz', project: 'other-project' }, true);
    // => "my-namespace/other-project/data/items/xyz"

    hidInstance.toHid({ schema: 'data', table: 'items', id: 'xyz', namespace: 'another-ns', project: 'my-project' });
    // => "another-ns/my-project/data/items/xyz"

    hidInstance.toHid({ schema: 'data', table: 'items', id: 'xyz', namespace: 'my-namespace', project: 'my-project' });
    // => "data/items/xyz" (defaults omitted)
    ```

## Environment Variable: `NEXT_PUBLIC_HID_NAMESPACE`

If the `defaultNamespace` argument is not provided to the `Hid()` factory function, the system will look for the `NEXT_PUBLIC_HID_NAMESPACE` environment variable. If found, its value will be used as the default namespace. This allows for a project-wide default namespace configuration.
If neither `defaultNamespace` argument nor the environment variable is set, `'hasyx'` will be used as the ultimate fallback default namespace.

Configuration note:
- `NEXT_PUBLIC_HID_NAMESPACE` is generated from `hasyx.config.json` via the configurator. Do not edit `.env` manually; use `npx hasyx config` to change settings.

## Use Cases

*   Uniquely identifying database records in logs, events, or API responses.
*   Creating stable and predictable identifiers for resources that can be parsed programmatically.
*   Linking resources across different microservices or modules if they share the same HID generation/parsing logic and default namespace/project context.
*   As the `object_hid` in payment transactions or subscriptions to link them to a specific billable item.

## Hasyx View and Automated HID Generation

A recent migration introduces a PostgreSQL view named `public.hasyx`. This view is designed to consolidate identifiers from all relevant tables into a single, queryable source of HIDs.

### Computed Columns for Relationships

To facilitate robust relationships between your original tables and the `public.hasyx` view, the migration adds two computed columns to each of your existing tables (those found in `public/hasura-schema.json` with a primary key, excluding system tables):

1.  **`_hasyx_schema_name` (TEXT)**: This column is generated always as the name of the schema the table belongs to (e.g., `'public'`).
2.  **`_hasyx_table_name` (TEXT)**: This column is generated always as the name of the table itself (e.g., `'users'`).

These columns are added using `ALTER TABLE ... ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS ... GENERATED ALWAYS AS (...) STORED`. This ensures that they are always present and accurate without requiring manual data entry.

**Purpose:**

*   **Relationship Mapping**: These columns are crucial for defining Hasura relationships. When creating a relationship from an original table (e.g., `public.users`) to the `public.hasyx` view, Hasura can map:
    *   `users.id` (primary key) → `hasyx.id`
    *   `users._hasyx_schema_name` → `hasyx.schema`
    *   `users._hasyx_table_name` → `hasyx.table`
*   This allows a precise join to the correct entry in the `public.hasyx` view that represents the specific row from the original table.

**Hasura Tracking and GraphQL Exposure:**

While these computed columns are added to your database tables and Hasura is aware of them (which is necessary for the relationship logic to work), they are not typically exposed directly via GraphQL queries through Hasura's default permissions unless explicitly configured. Their primary role is internal for building the HIDs and enabling the relationships.

### `public.hasyx` View Structure

The `public.hasyx` view has the following structure:

*   `hid` (TEXT): The fully constructed Hasyx Identifier (e.g., `namespace/project/schema/table/id`).
*   `namespace` (TEXT): The namespace, taken from `DEFAULT_NAMESPACE` in `lib/hid.ts`.
*   `project` (TEXT): The project name, derived from `package.json` or the current directory name.
*   `schema` (TEXT): The schema name of the original record.
*   `table` (TEXT): The table name of the original record.
*   `id` (TEXT): The primary key of the original record, cast to text.

### Automated Relationships

The migration also attempts to automatically create the following Hasura relationships:

1.  **From Original Table to `public.hasyx`**: An object relationship named `hasyx` is added to each original table, pointing to the corresponding entry in the `public.hasyx` view.
2.  **From `public.hasyx` to Original Table**: An object relationship named `{schema}_{table}` (e.g., `public_users`) is added to the `public.hasyx` view, pointing back to the specific row in the original table. This allows you to traverse from a generic HID back to the concrete source entity.

This setup provides a unified way to work with HIDs and easily navigate between the generic HID representation and the specific source records.
